Add proposal to TLS encrypt the Kafka Connect REST API (#10)
strimzi/proposals: 006-tls-encrypt-the-kafka-connect-rest-api.md

The `restListeners` field is designed for potential future extension, and is a list of items that contain a `protocol` field.
For this proposal, the `protocol` field only supports the value `http`. One (or more) items in the `restListeners` list will add the unencrypted HTTP listener on port 8083.

For example, the following CR will enable the HTTP listener on port 8083:
```
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta1
kind: KafkaConnect
spec:
  restListeners:
  - protocol: http
  ...
```

The schema for `restListeners` is as follows:
```
openAPIV3Schema:
  type: object
  properties:
    spec:
      type: object
      properties:
        restListeners:
          type: array
          items:
            type: object
            properties:
              protocol:
                type: string
                enum:
                - http
                description: The protocol of the REST listener.
            required:
            - protocol
          description: List of additional REST listeners.
        ...
```

### Certificate renewals

The self-signed TLS certificate will have a 1-year expiration.

> Thirty day before the self-signed TLS certificate expires, the operator will automatically renew the certificate, replace the old self-signed certificate, and restart the pods in a controlled manner to ensure the new certificates are in use by Kafka Connect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thirty days before the self-signed TLS certificate expires, the operator will automatically renew the certificate, replace the old self-signed certificate, and restart the pods in a controlled manner to ensure the new certificates are in use by Kafka Connect without losing availability.
```

Author: Updated

This would need to be a multi-phase process consisting of the following steps:

1. Generate new certificate

> 2. Distribute the public key to all pods and cluster operator truststores

Reviewer: Let's use the term certificate rather than public key, since a cert contains more information than just a public key.
```suggestion
2. Distribute the new certificate to all pods and cluster operator truststores
```

Author: Updated

3. Replace the key and roll all Connect pods

> 4. Remove the old public key from the truststores and roll all Connect pods

Reviewer: Presumably this happens at time (or shortly before) the old cert expires? Best to say so.

Author: Updated - thanks for the review :)

In the `KafkaConnect` operator case, the behaviour is only changed when the `strimzi.io/use-connector-resources: "true"` annotation is applied in the `KafkaConnect` CR (meaning that all connectors running on the Connect cluster are managed by the `KafkaConnector` operator).

The default behaviour of the `KafkaMirrorMaker2` operator and the `KafkaConnect` operator will be to deploy Kafka Connect clusters with a single TLS encrypted REST API listener.
A self-signed TLS certificate and key required to enable TLS encryption on the REST API listener are generated by the operator, stored in secrets for use by the operator clients and the Kafka Connect pods.
The certificates and keys are mounted in each Kafka Connect pod, which create an SSL keystore from the certificate and key and set the following properties in the generated connect configuration to enable an HTTPS listener:

```
listeners: https://:8443
rest.advertised.listener: https
rest.advertised.port: 8443
listeners.https.ssl.client.auth: none
listeners.https.ssl.keystore.location: /tmp/kafka/kafka-connect-rest.keystore.p12
listeners.https.ssl.keystore.password: ***generated password***

> listeners.https.ssl.keystore.type: PKCS12

Reviewer 2: IIRC, when Connect is running with multiple replicas, it is using the REST interface for communication between workers and their leader node (basically, requests to create connector etc. are forwarded tot he leader). So, since using self-signed certificate, wouldn't you need to also specify a truststore with the public key to allow the workes to trust the leader when forwarding the request?

Reviewer 3: The truststore was there before but I didn't know about this internal communication in a Kafka Connect cluster. If it's the case then we need the truststore. Sorry @ajborley

Author: No worries at all - I had forgotten about the distributed case. I have updated to add the truststore settings back in.

The `KafkaConnector`, `KafkaConnect` and `KafkaMirrorMaker2` operators will continue to use the TLS encrypted listener when an unencrypted HTTP listener is enabled.

The `restListeners` field is designed for potential future extension, and is a list of items that contain a `protocol` field.
For this proposal, the `protocol` field only supports the value `http`. One (or more) items in the `restListeners` list will add the unencrypted HTTP listener on port 8083.

For example, the following CR will enable the HTTP listener on port 8083:
```
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta1
kind: KafkaConnect
spec:
  restListeners:
  - protocol: http
  ...
```

The schema for `restListeners` is as follows:
```
openAPIV3Schema:
  type: object
  properties:
    spec:
      type: object
      properties:
        restListeners:
          type: array
          items:
            type: object
            properties:
              protocol:
                type: string
                enum:
                - http
                description: The protocol of the REST listener.
            required:
            - protocol
          description: List of additional REST listeners.
        ...
```

> #### Annotation alternative to enable a plain HTTP REST API listener

Reviewer 2: So, is this a rejected alternative? If not, how / when are we going to decide on one or the other?

Author: I wasn't sure how folks would feel about the addition to the `spec`, so I added this as a possible alternative. Given that there haven't been objections (so far) to the `spec` addition, I have moved this annotation to the **Rejected Alternatives** section.

Alternatively, a new annotation `strimzi.io/enable-plain-rest-listener` could be added, to avoid changing the spec.
Setting the `strimzi.io/enable-plain-rest-listener` annotation value to `true` would add the additional unencrypted HTTP listener on port 8083.

### Certificate renewals

The self-signed TLS certificate will have a 1-year expiration.

> Thirty day before the self-signed TLS certificate expires, the operator will automatically renew the certificate, replace the old self-signed certificate, and restart the pods in a controlled manner to ensure the new certificates are in use by Kafka Connect.

Reviewer 2: This would need to be a multi-phase process to handle the trust. Not sure if it is important to elaborate on it here, but you will probably need to:

1) Generate new certificate
2) Distribute the public key to all pods and CO truststores
3) Replace the key and roll all Connect pods
4) Remove the old public key from the truststores and roll all Connect pods

Author: Thanks for this - I have added these steps to the proposal to assist in the implementation.

The default network policies created by the Strimzi operators restrict incoming REST API calls to only allow access from the operator pod.
Users can define further network policies can be provided to override the default policy and allow wider access.

## Motivation

There is currently no way to TLS encrypt the Kafka Connect REST API, leaving the Connect REST listener as perhaps the last key endpoint that cannot currently be restricted using Strimzi.

## Proposal

This proposal changes the behaviour of the `KafkaMirrorMaker2` operator and the `KafkaConnect` operator.
In the `KafkaConnect` operator case, the behaviour is only changed when the `strimzi.io/use-connector-resources: "true"` annotation is applied in the `KafkaConnect` CR (meaning that all connectors running on the Connect cluster are managed by the `KafkaConnector` operator).

The default behaviour of the `KafkaMirrorMaker2` operator and the `KafkaConnect` operator will be to deploy Kafka Connect clusters with a single TLS encrypted REST API listener.

> A self-signed TLS certificate and key required to enable TLS encryption on the REST API listener are generated by the operator, stored in secrets for use by the operator clients and the Kafka Connect pods.

Reviewer 3: Why is the TLS certificate self-signed? Can't we use the cluster CA (which is self-signed cluster root certificate) to sign the TLS certificate for each Kafka Connect worker node as we do for each Kafka broker?
In this way, the client (so the operator calling the REST API) che verify the TLS certificate using the cluster CA certificate.

Author: The instance of Kafka Connect that the operator is calling may not be connected to a Strimzi Kafka - it can be any Kafka instance, so there might not be a cluster CA available to use. 

We may be able to use the cluster CA if it is available (in the same namespace, etc) or we could generate a Connect-specific CA for this proposal - do you think that generating signed TLS certificates from a CA cert would be better than generating self-signed certificates directly?

Reviewer 3: Tbh I see a self-signed certificate less secure. Self-signed certs are used for well-recognized CAs which then signs other certificates (or it could be a trusted internal CA in your organization). Are we sure that we want to support an external Kafka Connect not deployed by Strimzi? I thought that this PR was about securing the Kafka Connect instance deployed by Strimzi.

Author: @ppatierno - Sorry I wasn't clear - I meant an external (non-Strimzi) Kafka cluster that a `KafkaConnect` CR is configured to use. This proposal is about the REST API communication between the operator and a Strimzi-managed Kafka Connect. 

As the cluster CA is only created when you are using a Kafka cluster created via a `Kafka` CR, the cluster CA may not be available for use by the Strimzi-managed Kafka Connect instance. 

We could generate a connect-cluster-CA for sole use by the Kafka Connect instance, and generate certificates using that - would that be your preference here?

Reviewer 2: I agree that the Kafka Cluster CA cannot be used as a basis here because Connect is not bound to any particular Kafka CR.

I can see the concerns about the self-signed term. But the Kafka Cluster CA is also self-signed really. So I'm not sure I can see it make any difference here.

Reviewer 3: Ok but should at this point allow users to specify their own Kafka Connect CA as we do for the Kafka Cluster CA?

Reviewer 2: If we don't use a CA we cannot let users provide custom CA - that would be only server certificate I guess. Me personally, I'm fine to wait with this if there will be any interest. The Connect API is different from the Kafka listeners so the demand might be different as well.

Reviewer 3: I was misleading here. I thought the idea was to generate a self-signed Kafka Connect CA used for signing the worker nodes certificates but actually it's just a self-signed certificate (not a CA).

The certificates and keys are mounted in each Kafka Connect pod, which create an SSL truststore and keystore from the certificate and key and set the following properties in the generated connect configuration to enable an HTTPS connection:

```
listeners: https://:8443
rest.advertised.listener: https
rest.advertised.port: 8443
listeners.https.ssl.client.auth: none
listeners.https.ssl.truststore.location: /tmp/kafka/kafka-connect-rest.truststore.p12
listeners.https.ssl.truststore.password: ***generated password***
listeners.https.ssl.truststore.type: PKCS12
listeners.https.ssl.keystore.location: /tmp/kafka/kafka-connect-rest.keystore.p12
listeners.https.ssl.keystore.password: ***generated password***

> listeners.https.ssl.keystore.type: PKCS12

Reviewer 3: So it's clear to me about the keystone which contains the TLS certificate and key related to the Kafka Connect worker node for enabling TLS encryption with the client (operator).
It's not clear what's inside the truststore and why it's useful. If client auth would be enabled (which is not in this case) it would contain the CA certificate used to sign the clients certificates in order to validate their identity, but what should contain in this case?

Author: You're right, I think we only need the keystore in this example - I have updated in the latest commit.

```

> To communicate with the encrypted Connect REST API listener, the `KafkaMirrorMaker2`, `KafkaConnect` and `KafkaConnector` operators require modifications to the `AbstractConnectOperator` to apply the TLS certs as keystore credentials to a WebClient.

Reviewer 3: shouldn't it be just a truststore (not keystore) containing the CA cert to verify the TLS server cert got from the Kafka Connect listener on connection?

Author: Yep, that's right. I got the terminology mixed up - have updated in the latest commit.

For example, the following CR will enable the HTTP listener on port 8083:
```
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta1
kind: KafkaConnect
spec:
  restListeners:
  - protocol: http
  ...
```

The schema for `restListeners` is as follows:
```
openAPIV3Schema:
  type: object
  properties:
    spec:
      type: object
      properties:
        restListeners:
          type: array
          items:
            type: object
            properties:
              protocol:
                type: string
                enum:
                - http
                description: The protocol of the REST listener.
            required:
            - protocol
          description: List of additional REST listeners.
        ...
```

#### Annotation alternative to enable a plain HTTP REST API listener

Alternatively, a new annotation `strimzi.io/enable-plain-rest-listener` could be added, to avoid changing the spec.
Setting the `strimzi.io/enable-plain-rest-listener` annotation value to `true` would add the additional unencrypted HTTP listener on port 8083.

### Certificate renewals

The self-signed TLS certificate will have a 1-year expiration.

> One day before the self-signed TLS certificate expires, the operator will automatically renew the certificate, replace the old self-signed certificate, and restart the pods in a controlled manner to ensure the new certificates are in use by Kafka Connect.

Reviewer 4: I assume this is done on the periodic reconcile? Or a reconcile triggered due to the certificate renewal period?

Author: Yes, on the periodic reconcile. We could also add in [maintenance time windows](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/using.html#assembly-maintenance-time-windows-deployment-configuration-kafka), and/or support the `strimzi.io/force-renew` and `strimzi.io/force-replace` annotations to allow users to force new certs and keys to be created. What do you think?

Looking through the Kafka operator code I see that the default renewal period is 30 days before the cert expiry (which has a default of 365 days) - I will update the proposal to change 'One day before..' to '30 days before...'  so that the default periods match. Do you think these certificates need similar fine-grained control that users get in the Kafka `spec.clusterCa` fields?

Reviewer 4: I'd like to hear the other maintainers opinions on this, but this sounds reasonable to me.
